.TH A68TOC 1
.SH NAME
a68toc \- Algol 68 to C translator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B a68toc 
[
.I options
]
.I sourcefile
.SH DESCRIPTION

.SH OPTIONS
.LP
.TP 20
.BR \-verbose " (" \-v )
Causes some potentially helpful C comments to be generated.
.TP
.BR \-line " (" \-n )
Causes the generation of C pre-processor \fC#line\fR directives.
In its absence the option
.BR \-verbose ,
causes comments containing Algol 68 line number and source file to be generated.
.TP
.BR \-long " (" \-l )
Causes the translator to accept
.B "long long"
modes.
This is the default.
.TP
.BR \-short " (" \-s )
Causes the translator to accept
.B "short short"
modes.
.TP
.BR \-return_structs " (" \-r )
Prevents generated C functions from returning structure results directly,
it uses an extra pointer parameter instead.
.TP
.BR \-mark_closures " (" \-c )
Causes closures to be marked with a special value for debugging purposes.
.TP
.BR \-stack_closures " (" \-C )
Causes closures to be (unsafely) stacked rather than heaped.
.TP
.BR \-filename_truncate " (" \-f ) " integer"
Truncates module names to integer characters long when searching for USE and
library modules. eg. -f 8 for DOS FAT files.
.TP
.BI -staredit " starflags"
Sets the required staredit characters to \fIstarflags\fR.  The characters specified
in the
.SB A68_STAREDIT
environment variable are overriden unless \fIstarflags\fR starts with
"\fC+\fR" or "\fC-\fR" in which cases the \fIstarflags\fR are added to, or
removed from, those specifed in
.SB A68_STAREDIT .
.TP
.BI -dir " directory"
Add 
.I directory
to the front of the list of directories, specified in the 
.SB A68_DIR
environment variable, in which the translator searches for module information
(\fB.m\fR) files.
.TP
.BI -cdir " directory"
Add 
.I directory
to the front of the list of directories, specified in the 
.SB A68_CDIR
environment variable, in which the translator searches for previously generated
(\fB.c\fR) files when the
.B "-uname cfile"
option is specified.
.TP
.BI -lib " directory"
.I Directory
contains the modinfo (\fB.m\fR) files corresponding to library modules.
This overrides any value set in the
.SB A68_LIB
environment variable.
.TP
.B -nolib
Turns off the library lookup mechanism.
.TP
.B -stream
Causes RS stream language to be printed on standard output.
.TP
.B -dot
Use dot stropping.  (Note 2)
.TP
.B -quote
Use quote stropping. (Note 2)
.TP
.B -skip
Suppresses run-time error when missing non-\fBvoid\fR \fBout\fR part selected.
.TP
.B -tilde
Allows tilde as valid character in identifiers.  (Note 2)
.TP
.B -optbool
Uses the optimised versions of \fBand(bool,bool)\fR and \fBor(bool,bool)\fR.
.TP
.B -keeplist
Allows extension of a keeplist to maintain compatibility.  (Note 2)
.TP
.BR \-trace " (" \-t ) " \fIlevel\fR"
Controls level of expression tree diagnostics.
.TP
.BR \-debug_level " (" \-d ) " \fIlevel\fR"
Controls level of general diagnostics.
.TP
.BR \-debug_module " (" \-m ) " \fImodule\fR"
Turns on general diagnostics in \fImodule\fR.
.TP
.BR -cstream " [" " file " | " memory " ]
Controls how the translator's C streams are implemented.
.RS
.TP 10
.B file
Each C stream is a file.
.TP
.B memory
Each C stream is an area of memory.  This is the default.
.RE
.TP
.BI -uname uname-option
Controls how the translator's unique name generator is seeded.
If any error is detected, a warning is issued, and the translator proceeds as
if \fC-uname AAAAAAA\fP had been specified.
The possible values of \fIuname-option\fP are
.RS
.TP 10
.B seedfile
Read the seed from the file
.SB $A68_NAMESEED .
This is the default.
The specified file is updated after translation.
.TP
.B cfile
The seed is read from the configuration information contained in the C file
produced by a previous translation of the current module.
The C file is found by searching the directories specified using the
.B -cdir
option or
.SB $A68_CDIR
environment variable.
.TP
.I uname
The specified unique name is used as the seed.  The unique name should consist
of seven uppercase letters.  It is an error if the specified unique name
contains invalid characters.  If more than seven characters are specified, the
extra ones are silently ignored.  If fewer than seven characters are
specified, the unique name is padded on the right with 'A's.
.RE
.TP
.B -tmp
The generated C file, and C stream files (if 
.BR "-cstream file"
has been specified), are placed in \fC/tmp\fR rather than
the current directory.
This may improve performance on systems where \fC/tmp\fR is mapped into
virtual memory.
Beware of concurrent builds using this option.
.TP
.B -check
Check ALGOL 68 syntax.
No C file is generated, but module information is generated normally.
.TP
.B -V
Outputs the current version of Ctrans to standard output.
.TP
.B "-version -Version"
Outputs detailed configuration information to standard output.
.TP
.B -oldalien
Allow obsolete \fBalien\fR declaration semantics, i.e. right-hand side of
\fC#define\fR follows first space.  If right-hand side is empty, an
\fCextern\fR declaration is automatically generated.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 20
.IB name .c
The C file generated from \fIname\fR.a68.  The \fBa68\fR suffix is \fInot\fR
mandatory.
.TP
.IB name .m
Module information generated for \fBdecs\fR module \fIname\fR.
.TP
.B $A68_NAMESEED
The file containing the unique name seed.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 20
.B A68_NAMESEED
The name of the file containing the unique name seed.  The environment
variable
.SB CTRANS_NAMESEED
may also be used for backwards compatibility.
.TP
.B A68_STAREDIT
The set of required staredit characters.  This may be over-riden or modified
by the
.B -staredit
option.
.TP
.B A68_DIR
A colon-separated list of directories in which the translator will look for
module information (\fB.m\fR) files.  This may be modified by the 
.B -dir
option.
.TP
.B A68_CDIR
A colon-separated list of directories in which the translator will look for
previously generated (\fB.c\fR) files when the
.B "-uname cfile"
option has been specified.  This may be modified by the 
.B -cdir
option.
.TP
.B A68_LIB
The name of directory in which the translator will look for
module information (\fB.m\fR) files corresponding to library modules.
This may be overridden by the 
.BR -lib " or " -nolib
options.
.TP
.B A68_GC_DEBUG
Controls the amount of debugging information produced by the heap management
functions of the Algol 68 run-time library.
.TP
.B A68_GC_POLICY
Controls behaviour when a memory allocation cannot be satisfied.  The
specified behaviour may be overriden by the Algol68 program. Possible
values are as follows
.RS
.TP 5
.B 0
The garbage collector is called if the heap usage is above a certain
threshold.
This is the default.
.TP
.B 1
The garbage collector is never called (i.e. the heap is grown).
.TP
.B 2
The garbage collector is always called.  The heap is grown only if absolutely necessary.
.RE
.SH NOTES
.TP 5
.B 1
Not yet implemented.
.TP
.B 2
This option is a relic of the Multics compiler; it has not been tested and
maybe should be removed.

.\"Local Variables:
.\"compile-command: "ditroff -man a68toc.1 | xtroff "
.\"End:
